docs/Pipelines/PET_Linear.md, before:

# `pet-linear` - Linear processing of PET images

This pipeline performs spatial normalization to the MNI space and intensity
normalization of PET images.
Its steps include:

- affine registration to the [MNI152NLin2009cSym](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html#template-based-coordinate-systems)
template [Fonov et al., [2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.033),
[2009](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(09)70884-5)] in MNI space with the
SyN algorithm [[Avants et al., 2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2007.06.004)]
from the [ANTs](http://stnava.github.io/ANTs/) software package
[[Avants et al., 2014](https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.00044)];
- intensity normalization using the average PET uptake in reference regions
resulting in a standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) map;
- cropping of the registered images to remove the background.

## Prerequisites

You need to have performed the [`t1-linear`](../T1_Linear) pipeline on your
T1-weighted MR images.

## Dependencies

If you only installed the core of Clinica, this pipeline needs the installation
of **ANTs** on your computer. You can find how to install this software package
on the [third-party](../../Third-party) page.

## Running the pipeline

The pipeline can be run with the following command line:

```text
clinica run pet-linear <bids_directory> <caps_directory> <acq_label> <suvr_reference_region>
```

where:

- `bids_directory` is the input folder containing the dataset in a
[BIDS](../../BIDS) hierarchy;
- `caps_directory` is the output folder containing the results in a
[CAPS](../../CAPS/Introduction) hierarchy;
- `acq_label` is the label given to the PET acquisition, specifying the tracer
used (`acq-<acq_label>`). It can be for instance 'fdg' for
<sup>18</sup>F-fluorodeoxyglucose or 'av45' for <sup>18</sup>F-florbetapir;
- `suvr_reference_region` is the reference region used to perform intensity
normalization (i.e. dividing each voxel of the image by the average uptake in
this region) resulting in a standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) map. It can
be `cerebellumPons` or `cerebellumPons2` (used for amyloid tracers) and `pons` 
or `pons2` (used for FDG). See [PET introduction](./PET_Introduction.md) for 
more details about masks versions.

By default, cropped images (matrix size 169×208×179, 1 mm isotropic voxels) are
generated to reduce the computing power required when training deep learning
models. Use the `--uncropped_image` flag if you do not want to crop the image.

The pipeline also offers the possibility to save the PET image in the T1w space
after rigid transformation using the `--save_pet_in_t1w_space` flag.

!!! note
    The arguments common to all Clinica pipelines are described in
    [Interacting with Clinica](../../InteractingWithClinica).

## Outputs

Results are stored in the following folder of the [CAPS hierarchy](../../CAPS/Specifications/#pet-imaging-data):
`subjects/<participant_id>/<session_id>/pet_linear`.

The main output files are:

- `<source_file>_space-MNI152NLin2009cSym_desc-Crop_res-1x1x1_suvr-<label>_pet.nii.gz`:
PET SUVR image registered to the [`MNI152NLin2009cSym` template](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html)
and cropped.
- `<source_file>_space-T1w_rigid.mat`: rigid transformation between the PET and
T1w images estimated with [ANTs](https://stnava.github.io/ANTs/).
- (optional) `<source_file>_space-MNI152NLin2009cSym_res-1x1x1_pet.nii.gz`:
PET SUVR image affinely registered to the [`MNI152NLin2009cSym` template](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html)
(i.e. not cropped).
- (optional) `<source_file>_space-T1w_pet.nii.gz`: PET image affinely registered
to the associated T1w image.

## Going further

You can now run the [`deeplearning-prepare-data`
pipeline](../DeepLearning_PrepareData) to prepare images to be used with the
PyTorch library [[Paszke et al.,
2019]](https://papers.nips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library)
for classification based on deep learning using the [AD-DL
framework](https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-DL) presented in [[Wen et al.,
2020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2020.101694)].

## Describing this pipeline in your paper

!!! cite "Example of paragraph"
    These results have been obtained using the `pet-linear` pipeline of Clinica
    [[Routier et al](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02308126/)].
    This pipeline first performs intra-subject rigid registration of the PET
    image into the space of the subject’s T1-weighted (T1w) MR image using the
    SyN algorithm [[Avants et al., 2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2007.06.004)]
    from ANTs [[Avants et al., 2014](https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.00044)].
    The PET to T1w transformation is then composed with T1w to ICBM 2009c
    nonlinear symmetric template affine transformation, obtained with
    `t1-linear`, to transport the PET image to the MNI space [Fonov et al.,
    [2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.033),
    [2009](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(09)70884-5)].
    The PET image is further intensity normalized using the average PET uptake
    in a reference region ([pons | pons + cerebellum]), resulting in a
    standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) map.
    The PET SUVR image in MNI space is finally cropped to remove the background,
    resulting in images of size 169×208×179 with 1 mm isotropic voxels.

!!! tip
    Easily access the papers cited on this page on
    [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2240070/clinica_aramislab/collections/8AEDUMZB).

Commit message:

Major refactoring of the CLI (#275)
* Refactor CLI using Click

* Fix relative imports

* No show_default for Click arguments

* Add missing multiple for a Click option

* Update clinica/iotools/converters/oasis_to_bids/oasis_to_bids_cli.py

Co-authored-by: mdiazmel <mauricio.diaz@inria.fr>

* Move some pet pipeline options to arguments

* Add description for clinica run subcommand

* Display pipelines by registration order

* Add missing pet-surface-longitudinal pipeline

* Add missing registration of dartel2mni pipeline

* Add missing help string for dwi-dti pipeline

* Use shorter CLI descriptions

* Fix voxel_size type hint

* Use more explicit argument names in iotools CLI

* Update docs with new CLI synopsis

* Fixup highlighting of shell commands

* Add option groups

* Fix shortening of pipeline help strings

* Display help string with -h option

* Add help string for verbose option

* Update pipeline template

* Raise display width to 160

* Fixup ending of some pipeline help strings

* Add missing option group declaration

* Fix missing pipeline option group

* Fix wrong type signature

* Add missing multiplicity to option

* Add tests for help strings in cli

* Update documentation for converters cli

* Fix ci script

* Fix DWI preprocessing pipelines name in cli

* Fix pipelines name in tests

* Fix group_origin arguments for ML pipelines

* Update documentation for pipelines cli

* Fix uppercase in description of CAPS directory

* Add missing main boilerplate

Co-authored-by: mdiazmel <mauricio.diaz@inria.fr>

docs/Pipelines/PET_Linear.md, after:

# `pet-linear` - Linear processing of PET images

This pipeline performs spatial normalization to the MNI space and intensity
normalization of PET images.
Its steps include:

- affine registration to the [MNI152NLin2009cSym](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html#template-based-coordinate-systems)
template [Fonov et al., [2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.033),
[2009](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(09)70884-5)] in MNI space with the
SyN algorithm [[Avants et al., 2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2007.06.004)]
from the [ANTs](http://stnava.github.io/ANTs/) software package
[[Avants et al., 2014](https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.00044)];
- intensity normalization using the average PET uptake in reference regions
resulting in a standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) map;
- cropping of the registered images to remove the background.

## Prerequisites

You need to have performed the [`t1-linear`](../T1_Linear) pipeline on your
T1-weighted MR images.

## Dependencies

If you only installed the core of Clinica, this pipeline needs the installation
of **ANTs** on your computer. You can find how to install this software package
on the [third-party](../../Third-party) page.

## Running the pipeline

The pipeline can be run with the following command line:

```shell
clinica run pet-linear [OPTIONS] BIDS_DIRECTORY CAPS_DIRECTORY ACQ_LABEL
                       {pons|cerebellumPons|pons2|cerebellumPons2}
```

where:

- ` BIDS_DIRECTORY` is the input folder containing the dataset in a
[BIDS](../../BIDS) hierarchy;
- `CAPS_DIRECTORY` is the output folder containing the results in a
[CAPS](../../CAPS/Introduction) hierarchy;
- `ACQ_LABEL` is the label given to the PET acquisition, specifying the tracer
used (`acq-<acq_label>`). It can be for instance 'fdg' for
<sup>18</sup>F-fluorodeoxyglucose or 'av45' for <sup>18</sup>F-florbetapir;
- The reference region is used to perform intensity normalization (i.e.
  dividing each voxel of the image by the average uptake in this region)
  resulting in a standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) map. It can be
  `cerebellumPons` or `cerebellumPons2` (used for amyloid tracers) and `pons`
  or `pons2` (used for FDG). See [PET introduction](./PET_Introduction.md) for
  more details about masks versions.

By default, cropped images (matrix size 169×208×179, 1 mm isotropic voxels) are
generated to reduce the computing power required when training deep learning
models. Use the `--uncropped_image` option if you do not want to crop the image.

The pipeline also offers the possibility to save the PET image in the T1w space
after rigid transformation using the `--save_pet_in_t1w_space` option.

!!! note
    The arguments common to all Clinica pipelines are described in
    [Interacting with Clinica](../../InteractingWithClinica).

!!! tip
    Do not hesitate to type `clinica run pet-linear --help` to see the full
    list of parameters.

## Outputs

Results are stored in the following folder of the [CAPS hierarchy](../../CAPS/Specifications/#pet-imaging-data):
`subjects/<participant_id>/<session_id>/pet_linear`.

The main output files are:

- `<source_file>_space-MNI152NLin2009cSym_desc-Crop_res-1x1x1_suvr-<label>_pet.nii.gz`:
PET SUVR image registered to the [`MNI152NLin2009cSym` template](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html)
and cropped.
- `<source_file>_space-T1w_rigid.mat`: rigid transformation between the PET and
T1w images estimated with [ANTs](https://stnava.github.io/ANTs/).
- (optional) `<source_file>_space-MNI152NLin2009cSym_res-1x1x1_pet.nii.gz`:
PET SUVR image affinely registered to the [`MNI152NLin2009cSym` template](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html)
(i.e. not cropped).
- (optional) `<source_file>_space-T1w_pet.nii.gz`: PET image affinely registered
to the associated T1w image.

## Going further

You can now run the [`deeplearning-prepare-data`
pipeline](../DeepLearning_PrepareData) to prepare images to be used with the
PyTorch library [[Paszke et al.,
2019]](https://papers.nips.cc/paper/9015-pytorch-an-imperative-style-high-performance-deep-learning-library)
for classification based on deep learning using the [AD-DL
framework](https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-DL) presented in [[Wen et al.,
2020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2020.101694)].

## Describing this pipeline in your paper

!!! cite "Example of paragraph"
    These results have been obtained using the `pet-linear` pipeline of Clinica
    [[Routier et al](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02308126/)].
    This pipeline first performs intra-subject rigid registration of the PET
    image into the space of the subject’s T1-weighted (T1w) MR image using the
    SyN algorithm [[Avants et al., 2008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.media.2007.06.004)]
    from ANTs [[Avants et al., 2014](https://doi.org/10.3389/fninf.2014.00044)].
    The PET to T1w transformation is then composed with T1w to ICBM 2009c
    nonlinear symmetric template affine transformation, obtained with
    `t1-linear`, to transport the PET image to the MNI space [Fonov et al.,
    [2011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.07.033),
    [2009](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053-8119(09)70884-5)].
    The PET image is further intensity normalized using the average PET uptake
    in a reference region ([pons | pons + cerebellum]), resulting in a
    standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) map.
    The PET SUVR image in MNI space is finally cropped to remove the background,
    resulting in images of size 169×208×179 with 1 mm isotropic voxels.

!!! tip
    Easily access the papers cited on this page on
    [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2240070/clinica_aramislab/collections/8AEDUMZB).
