docs/Pipelines/Stats_Volume.md, before:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD046 -->
# `statistics-volume` - Volume-based mass-univariate analysis with SPM

This pipeline performs statistical analysis (currently group comparison) on volume-based features using the general linear model (GLM) [[Friston et al., 1994](https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.460020402)].
To that aim, the pipeline relies on the tools available in [SPM](http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/).

Volume-based measurements are analyzed in the [IXI549Space](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html#standard-template-identifiers) (from SPM12).
Currently, this pipeline mainly handles gray matter maps obtained from T1-weighted MR images using the [`t1-volume` pipeline](../T1_Volume) and standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) maps obtained from PET data using the [`pet-volume` pipeline](../PET_Volume).

## Dependencies
<!--If you installed the docker image of Clinica, nothing is required.-->

If you only installed the core of Clinica, this pipeline needs the installation of **Matlab** and **SPM**, or of **SPM standalone**, on your computer.
You can find how to install these software packages on the [third-party](../../Third-party) page.

## Running the pipeline

The pipeline is divided into two sub-pipelines:

- `statistics-volume`: performs group comparison but no statistical correction.
It generates an SPM report necessary to perform statistical corrections using the second sub-pipeline.
- `statistics-volume-correction`: performs family-wise error rate (FWE) or false discovery rate (FDR ) correction at the peak/cluster level.
The user has to report the values from the SPM report generated by `statistics-volume` in order to run this pipeline.

### `statistics-volume` pipeline

The pipeline can be run with the following command line:

```Text
clinica run statistics-volume <caps_directory> <group_label> <origin_input_data> <subject_visits_with_covariates_tsv> <contrast>
```

where:

- `caps_directory` is the output folder containing  the results of the [`t1-volume`](../T1_Volume) or [`pet-volume`](../PET_Volume) pipeline and the output of the present command, both in a [CAPS hierarchy](../../CAPS/Introduction).
- `group_label` defines the group name for the analysis.
- `origin_input_data` is the type of volume-based feature: type `t1-volume` to use gray matter maps, `pet-volume` to use PET data or `custom-pipeline` to use your own data in CAPS directory (see [below](#advanced-specifying-what-volume-data-to-use) for details).
- `subject_visits_with_covariates_tsv` is a TSV file containing a list of subjects with their sessions and all the covariates and factors of the model (the content of the file is explained in the [Example](../Stats_Surface/#comparison-analysis) subsection of the `statistics-surface` pipeline).
- `contrast` is a string defining the contrast matrix or the variable of interest for the GLM, e.g. `group` or `age`.

Pipeline options:

- `--group_label_dartel`: Name of the DARTEL template that Clinica needs to use to grab the input files.
- `--full_width_at_half_maximum`: Value of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) used when smoothing the input files.
Default value is `8` mm.

Pipeline options if you use inputs from `pet-volume` pipeline:

- `--acq_label`: Name of the label given to the PET acquisition, specifying the tracer used (`acq-<acq_label>`).
- `--suvr_reference_region`: Reference region used to perform intensity normalization (i.e. dividing each voxel of the image by the average uptake in this region) resulting in a standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) map.
It can be `cerebellumPons` (used for amyloid tracers) or `pons` (used for FDG).
- `--use_pvc_data`: Use PET data with partial value correction (by default, PET data with no PVC are used)

### `statistics-volume-correction` pipeline

Once the `statistics-volume` sub-pipeline has finished, you need to open the SPM report (`report1.png` or `report2.png` file). This will look like as follows:

![SPM report](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/49677712/75558316-f0f23280-5a41-11ea-9489-be40ee66ec16.png)

You will need to report the following information in the `statistics-volume-correction` pipeline:

- `height_threshold`: T value corresponding to an uncorrected p-value of 0.001
- `FWEp`: height threshold (i.e. voxel-level (= peak) threshold)
- `FDRp`: height threshold (i.e. voxel-level (= peak) threshold)
- `FWEc`: extent threshold (i.e. cluster size threshold)
- `FDRc`: extent threshold (i.e. cluster size threshold)

The pipeline can then be run with the following command line:

```Text
clinica run statistics-volume-correction  <caps_directory> <t_map> <height_threshold> <FWEp> <FDRp> <FWEc> <FDRc>
```

where:

- `t_map` is the name of the T statistic map used for the correction.

Optional parameters:

- `n_cuts`: Number of cuts to display in the final figure

## Outputs

Results are stored in the following folder of the
[CAPS hierarchy](../../CAPS/Specifications/#statistics-volume-volume-based-mass-univariate-analysis-with-spm):
`groups/<group_id>/statistics_volume/group_comparison_measure-<measure-label>`.
The most important files are:

- `<group_id>_participants.tsv`: copy of the `subject_visits_with_covariates_tsv` parameter file.
- `<group_id>_<grp_1>-lt-<grp_2>_measure-<msr>_fwhm-<fwhm>_TStatistics.nii`: T statistics associated with the hypothesis group1 < group2.
- `<group_id>_mask.nii`: voxels included in the analysis.
- `<group_id>_report.png`: all the results of the two sample t-test generated by SPM.
Contains information necessary to use the `statistics-volume-correction` sub-pipeline.

The `<group_1>-lt-<group_2>` means that the tested hypothesis is: "the measurement of `<group_1>` is lower than (`lt`) the measurement of `<group_2>`".
The pipeline includes both contrasts so `*<group_2>-lt-<group_1>*` files are also saved.

The full list of output files from the `statistics-volume-[correction]` pipeline can be found in the
[The ClinicA Processed Structure (CAPS) specifications](../../CAPS/Specifications/#statistics-volume-volume-based-mass-univariate-analysis-with-spm).

## Describing this pipeline in your paper

!!! cite "Example of paragraph:"
    These results have been obtained using the `statistics-volume` pipeline of Clinica [[Routier et al](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02308126/)].
    This pipeline is a wrapper of the statistical analysis toolbox implemented in [SPM](http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/).
    More precisely, a point-wise, voxel-to-voxel model was used to conduct a group comparison of whole brain voxels.
    The data were smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) set to `<FWHM>` mm.
    The general linear model was used to control for the effect of `<covariate_1>`, ... and  `<covariate_N>`.

    - For FWEp: Statistics were corrected for multiple comparisons using the family-wise error (FWE) correction at the peak level with a statistical threshold of P < 0.05 FWE.
    - For FWEc: Statistics were corrected for multiple comparisons using the family-wise error (FWE) correction at the cluster level.
    A statistical threshold of P < `<ClusterThreshold>` was first applied (height threshold).
    An extent threshold of P < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons was then applied at the cluster level.
    - For FDRc: Statistics were corrected for multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) correction at the cluster level.
    A statistical threshold of P < `<ClusterThreshold>` was first applied (height threshold).
    An extent threshold of P < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons was then applied at the cluster level.

!!! tip
    Easily access the papers cited on this page on [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2240070/clinica_aramislab/collections/ACBHQWPB).

## Support

- You can use the [Clinica Google Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/clinica-user) to ask for help!
- Report an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/aramis-lab/clinica/issues).

## (Advanced) Using volumes other than gray matter or PET SUVR maps

If you run the help command line `clinica run statistics-volume -h`, you will find the following flags:

- `--custom_files CUSTOM_FILES`: allows you to specify which file should be taken in the `CAPS/subjects` directory.
For example, if you want to use the file `<participant_id>_<session_id>_task-rest_acq-av45_pet_space-Ixi549Space_pet.nii.gz` that is contained in `CAPS/subjects/<participant_id>/ses-<session_id>/pet/preprocessing/<group_id>`, you can use the argument `*sub-*_ses-*_task-rest_acq-av45_pet_space-Ixi549Space_pet.nii.gz`.
If you want to specify the group, you can use `<group_id>/sub-*_ses-*_task-rest_acq-av45_pet_space-Ixi549Space_pet.nii.gz`.
- `--measure_label MEASURE_LABEL`: specifies the name of the feature type.
It will appear in the `_measure-<MEASURE_LABEL>` of the output files once the pipeline has run.

Commit message:

Major refactoring of the CLI (#275)
* Refactor CLI using Click

* Fix relative imports

* No show_default for Click arguments

* Add missing multiple for a Click option

* Update clinica/iotools/converters/oasis_to_bids/oasis_to_bids_cli.py

Co-authored-by: mdiazmel <mauricio.diaz@inria.fr>

* Move some pet pipeline options to arguments

* Add description for clinica run subcommand

* Display pipelines by registration order

* Add missing pet-surface-longitudinal pipeline

* Add missing registration of dartel2mni pipeline

* Add missing help string for dwi-dti pipeline

* Use shorter CLI descriptions

* Fix voxel_size type hint

* Use more explicit argument names in iotools CLI

* Update docs with new CLI synopsis

* Fixup highlighting of shell commands

* Add option groups

* Fix shortening of pipeline help strings

* Display help string with -h option

* Add help string for verbose option

* Update pipeline template

* Raise display width to 160

* Fixup ending of some pipeline help strings

* Add missing option group declaration

* Fix missing pipeline option group

* Fix wrong type signature

* Add missing multiplicity to option

* Add tests for help strings in cli

* Update documentation for converters cli

* Fix ci script

* Fix DWI preprocessing pipelines name in cli

* Fix pipelines name in tests

* Fix group_origin arguments for ML pipelines

* Update documentation for pipelines cli

* Fix uppercase in description of CAPS directory

* Add missing main boilerplate

Co-authored-by: mdiazmel <mauricio.diaz@inria.fr>

docs/Pipelines/Stats_Volume.md, after:

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD046 -->
# `statistics-volume` - Volume-based mass-univariate analysis with SPM

This pipeline performs statistical analysis (currently group comparison) on volume-based features using the general linear model (GLM) [[Friston et al., 1994](https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.460020402)].
To that aim, the pipeline relies on the tools available in [SPM](http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/).

Volume-based measurements are analyzed in the [IXI549Space](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/99-appendices/08-coordinate-systems.html#standard-template-identifiers) (from SPM12).
Currently, this pipeline mainly handles gray matter maps obtained from T1-weighted MR images using the [`t1-volume` pipeline](../T1_Volume) and standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) maps obtained from PET data using the [`pet-volume` pipeline](../PET_Volume).

## Dependencies
<!--If you installed the docker image of Clinica, nothing is required.-->

If you only installed the core of Clinica, this pipeline needs the installation of **Matlab** and **SPM**, or of **SPM standalone**, on your computer.
You can find how to install these software packages on the [third-party](../../Third-party) page.

## Running the pipeline

The pipeline is divided into two sub-pipelines:

- `statistics-volume`: performs group comparison but no statistical correction.
It generates an SPM report necessary to perform statistical corrections using the second sub-pipeline.
- `statistics-volume-correction`: performs family-wise error rate (FWE) or false discovery rate (FDR ) correction at the peak/cluster level.
The user has to report the values from the SPM report generated by `statistics-volume` in order to run this pipeline.

### `statistics-volume` pipeline

The pipeline can be run with the following command line:

```shell
clinica run statistics-volume [OPTIONS] CAPS_DIRECTORY GROUP_LABEL {t1-freesurfer|pet-surface|custom-pipeline}
                              SUBJECT_VISITS_WITH_COVARIATES_TSV CONTRAST
```

where:

- `CAPS_DIRECTORY` is the output folder containing  the results of the [`t1-volume`](../T1_Volume) or [`pet-volume`](../PET_Volume) pipeline and the output of the present command, both in a [CAPS hierarchy](../../CAPS/Introduction).
- `GROUP_LABEL` defines the group name for the analysis.
- The third posisional argument defines the type of volume-based feature: type `t1-volume` to use gray matter maps, `pet-volume` to use PET data or `custom-pipeline` to use your own data in CAPS directory (see [below](#advanced-specifying-what-volume-data-to-use) for details).
- `SUBJECT_VISITS_WITH_COVARIATES_TSV` is a TSV file containing a list of subjects with their sessions and all the covariates and factors of the model (the content of the file is explained in the [Example](../Stats_Surface/#comparison-analysis) subsection of the `statistics-surface` pipeline).
- `CONTRAST` is a string defining the contrast matrix or the variable of interest for the GLM, e.g. `group` or `age`.

Pipeline options:

- `--group_label_dartel`: Name of the DARTEL template that Clinica needs to use to grab the input files.
- `--full_width_at_half_maximum`: Value of the full width at half maximum (FWHM) used when smoothing the input files.
Default value is `8` mm.

Pipeline options if you use inputs from `pet-volume` pipeline:

- `--acq_label`: Name of the label given to the PET acquisition, specifying the tracer used (`acq-<acq_label>`).
- `--suvr_reference_region`: Reference region used to perform intensity normalization (i.e. dividing each voxel of the image by the average uptake in this region) resulting in a standardized uptake value ratio (SUVR) map.
It can be `cerebellumPons` (used for amyloid tracers) or `pons` (used for FDG).
- `--use_pvc_data`: Use PET data with partial value correction (by default, PET data with no PVC are used)

### `statistics-volume-correction` pipeline

Once the `statistics-volume` sub-pipeline has finished, you need to open the SPM report (`report1.png` or `report2.png` file). This will look like as follows:

![SPM report](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/49677712/75558316-f0f23280-5a41-11ea-9489-be40ee66ec16.png)

You will need to report the following information in the `statistics-volume-correction` pipeline:

- `height_threshold`: T value corresponding to an uncorrected p-value of 0.001
- `FWEp`: height threshold (i.e. voxel-level (= peak) threshold)
- `FDRp`: height threshold (i.e. voxel-level (= peak) threshold)
- `FWEc`: extent threshold (i.e. cluster size threshold)
- `FDRc`: extent threshold (i.e. cluster size threshold)

The pipeline can then be run with the following command line:

```shell
clinica run statistics-volume-correction [OPTIONS] CAPS_DIRECTORY T_MAP HEIGHT_THRESHOLD FWEP FDRP FWEC FDRC
```

where:

- `T_MAP` is the name of the T statistic map used for the correction.

Optional parameters:

- `n_cuts`: Number of cuts to display in the final figure

## Outputs

Results are stored in the following folder of the
[CAPS hierarchy](../../CAPS/Specifications/#statistics-volume-volume-based-mass-univariate-analysis-with-spm):
`groups/<group_id>/statistics_volume/group_comparison_measure-<measure-label>`.
The most important files are:

- `<group_id>_participants.tsv`: copy of the `subject_visits_with_covariates_tsv` parameter file.
- `<group_id>_<grp_1>-lt-<grp_2>_measure-<msr>_fwhm-<fwhm>_TStatistics.nii`: T statistics associated with the hypothesis group1 < group2.
- `<group_id>_mask.nii`: voxels included in the analysis.
- `<group_id>_report.png`: all the results of the two sample t-test generated by SPM.
Contains information necessary to use the `statistics-volume-correction` sub-pipeline.

The `<group_1>-lt-<group_2>` means that the tested hypothesis is: "the measurement of `<group_1>` is lower than (`lt`) the measurement of `<group_2>`".
The pipeline includes both contrasts so `*<group_2>-lt-<group_1>*` files are also saved.

The full list of output files from the `statistics-volume-[correction]` pipeline can be found in the
[The ClinicA Processed Structure (CAPS) specifications](../../CAPS/Specifications/#statistics-volume-volume-based-mass-univariate-analysis-with-spm).

## Describing this pipeline in your paper

!!! cite "Example of paragraph:"
    These results have been obtained using the `statistics-volume` pipeline of Clinica [[Routier et al](https://hal.inria.fr/hal-02308126/)].
    This pipeline is a wrapper of the statistical analysis toolbox implemented in [SPM](http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/).
    More precisely, a point-wise, voxel-to-voxel model was used to conduct a group comparison of whole brain voxels.
    The data were smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) set to `<FWHM>` mm.
    The general linear model was used to control for the effect of `<covariate_1>`, ... and  `<covariate_N>`.

    - For FWEp: Statistics were corrected for multiple comparisons using the family-wise error (FWE) correction at the peak level with a statistical threshold of P < 0.05 FWE.
    - For FWEc: Statistics were corrected for multiple comparisons using the family-wise error (FWE) correction at the cluster level.
    A statistical threshold of P < `<ClusterThreshold>` was first applied (height threshold).
    An extent threshold of P < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons was then applied at the cluster level.
    - For FDRc: Statistics were corrected for multiple comparisons using the false discovery rate (FDR) correction at the cluster level.
    A statistical threshold of P < `<ClusterThreshold>` was first applied (height threshold).
    An extent threshold of P < 0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons was then applied at the cluster level.

!!! tip
    Easily access the papers cited on this page on [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2240070/clinica_aramislab/collections/ACBHQWPB).

## Support

- You can use the [Clinica Google Group](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/clinica-user) to ask for help!
- Report an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/aramis-lab/clinica/issues).

## (Advanced) Using volumes other than gray matter or PET SUVR maps

If you run the help command line `clinica run statistics-volume -h`, you will find the following options:

- `--custom_files CUSTOM_FILES`: allows you to specify which file should be taken in the `CAPS/subjects` directory.
For example, if you want to use the file `<participant_id>_<session_id>_task-rest_acq-av45_pet_space-Ixi549Space_pet.nii.gz` that is contained in `CAPS/subjects/<participant_id>/ses-<session_id>/pet/preprocessing/<group_id>`, you can use the argument `*sub-*_ses-*_task-rest_acq-av45_pet_space-Ixi549Space_pet.nii.gz`.
If you want to specify the group, you can use `<group_id>/sub-*_ses-*_task-rest_acq-av45_pet_space-Ixi549Space_pet.nii.gz`.
- `--measure_label MEASURE_LABEL`: specifies the name of the feature type.
It will appear in the `_measure-<MEASURE_LABEL>` of the output files once the pipeline has run.
