
# Introduction

Clinica has its own specifications for storing processed data, called **CAPS** (ClinicA Processed Structure), inspired from the BIDS structure.


### Motivation
The BIDS specifications currently do not provide specific rules for the processed data, so the goal of CAPS (designed by the [Aramis Lab](http://www.aramislab.fr/)) is to define a hierarchy for the Clinica processed data. The idea is to include in a single folder all the results of the different pipelines and organize the data following the main patterns of the BIDS specification.

!!! note
    There is an ongoing initiative called BIDS-derivatives that aim to provide a BIDS standard for processed data. However, in its current state, it is not well adapted to Clinica outputs. This is why Clinica has its own specifications called CAPS. We try to contribute to BIDS-derivatives and the two specifications should ultimately converge.


### Definitions

We use the same definitions of BIDS Specifications 1.0.0 concerning **Dataset**, **Subject**, **Session**, **MRI acquisition**, **Data type**, **Task**, **Event** and **Run**. On top on that, we define the notion of:

1. **Group** - a set of subjects. There is one flag that you will meet when working on any group-wise analysis (e.g. template creation from a list of subjects, statistical analysis). This is simply a label name that will define the group of subjects used for this analysis. It will be written in your output CAPS folder, for possible future reuses. For example, an `AD` group_id label could be used in case you create a template for a group of Alzheimer’s disease patients. Any time you would like to use this `AD` template you will need to provide the group_id used to identify the pipeline output obtained from this group. You might also use `CNvsAD`, for instance, as group_id for a statistical group comparison.


### Differences with BIDS

As explained on the Motivation section, the `derivatives/` folder is not taken into account. It replaced by the CAPS folder.

CAPS assumes that the session is always present in a BIDS dataset even though there is a single session. In other words, all datasets are considered longitudinal, even when they have only one session.

One last difference with BIDS specifications is that NifTi files generated by a pipeline are always compressed.


### Subject and group naming

The naming convention for subjects (participants) is identical to the BIDS Specifications 1.0.0.

Groups should be assigned unique labels. Labels can consist of letters and/or numbers.
