docs/CAPS/Introduction.md, before:


# Introduction

The outputs of the Clinica pipelines are stored following a specific structure called **CAPS** (ClinicA Processed Structure), which is inspired from the [BIDS](../BIDS.md) structure and the upcoming BIDS Derivatives.
The CAPS specifications are described in detail [here](../Specifications).

## Motivation

When the development of Clinica started in 2015, the BIDS specifications did not provide specific rules for the processed data.
As a result, the goal of CAPS (designed by the [Aramis Lab](http://www.aramislab.fr/)) was to define a hierarchy for the data processed using Clinica.
The idea is to include in a single folder all the results of the different pipelines and organize the data following the main patterns of the BIDS specification.

!!! note
    It is our objective for the CAPS and BIDS Derivatives specifications to converge.

## Definitions

We use the same definitions as the BIDS Specifications concerning **Dataset**, **Subject**, **Session**, **MRI acquisition**, **Data type**, **Task**, **Event** and **Run**.
On top on that, we define the notion of:

1. **Group** - a set of subjects (`group` key).
You will find this notion when working on any group-wise analysis (e.g. template creation from a list of subjects, statistical analysis).
This is simply a label name that will define the group of subjects used for this analysis.
It will be written in your output CAPS folder, for possible future reuses.
For example, an `AD` group label could be used in case you create a template for a group of Alzheimer’s disease patients.
Any time you would like to use this `AD` template you will need to provide the group label used to identify the pipeline output obtained from this group.
You might also use `CNvsAD`, for instance, as group label for a statistical group comparison.

2. **Longitudinal template** - a set of sessions (`long` key).
You will find this notion when working on longitudinal datasets.
This is simply a label that will define the set of sessions considered.
Unlike group, longitudinal template is dedicated to intra-subject analysis.
Besides, the longitudinal label for a participant is defined concatenating the different session labels in alphabetical order so that the longitudinal label will be unique.
For instance, if the intra-subject template is computed on `M018` and `M000` sessions, the longitudinal ID will be `long-M000M018`.

## Differences with BIDS

Several differences exist between the BIDS and CAPS specifications.

- Instead of the BIDS `derivatives/` folder, the processed data are stored in the CAPS folder.

- CAPS assumes that the session is always present in a BIDS dataset even though there is a single session. In other words, all datasets are considered longitudinal, even when they have only one session.

- NIfTI files generated by a Clinica pipeline are always compressed. Compression is recommended by the BIDS specification but not mandatory.

## Subject and group naming

The naming convention for subjects (participants) is identical to the BIDS Specifications 1.0.0.

Groups should be assigned unique labels. Labels can consist of letters and/or numbers.

## Examples

### Subject level example

This CAPS folder contains the outputs of the [`dwi-preprocessing-*` pipeline](../../Pipelines/DWI_Preprocessing) and [`dwi-dti` pipeline](../../Pipelines/DWI_DTI) of a fictional participant `CLNC01` at session `M00`:

```Text
subjects/
└─ sub-CLNC01/
   └─ ses-M000/
      └─ dwi/
         ├─ dti_based_processing/
         │  ├─ atlas_statistics/
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-JHUTracts0_res-1x1x1_map-FA_statistics.tsv
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-JHUTracts0_res-1x1x1_map-MD_statistics.tsv
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-JHUTracts0_res-1x1x1_map-AD_statistics.tsv
         │  │  └─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-JHUTracts0_res-1x1x1_map-RD_statistics.tsv
         │  ├─ native_space/
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_model-DTI_diffmodel.nii.gz
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_FA.nii.gz
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_MD.nii.gz
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_AD.nii.gz
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_RD.nii.gz
         │  │  └─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_DECFA.nii.gz
         │  └─ normalized_space/
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_AD.nii.gz
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_affine.mat
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_deformation.nii.gz
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_FA.nii.gz
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_MD.nii.gz
         │     └─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_RD.nii.gz
         └─ preprocessing/
            ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_brainmask.nii.gz
            ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_preproc.bval
            ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_preproc.bvec
            └─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_preproc.nii.gz
```

### Group level example

This CAPS folder contains the outputs of a group comparison of patients with Alzheimer’s disease (`AD`) and healthy subjects (`HC`) thanks to the [`statistics-surface` pipeline](../../Pipelines/Stats_Surface).
Results are stored under the group ID `ADvsHC`:

```Text
groups/
└─ group-ADvsHC/
   └─ statistics/
      ├─ participant.tsv
      └─ surfstat_group_comparison/
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_FDR.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_FDR.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_TStatistics.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_TStatistics.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_correctedPValue.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_correctedPValue.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_uncorrectedPValue.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_uncorrectedPValue.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_glm.json
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_FDR.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_FDR.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_TStatistics.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_TStatistics.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_correctedPValue.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_correctedPValue.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_uncorrectedPValue.jpg
         └─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_uncorrectedPValue.mat
```

### Subject level example with longitudinal analysis

This CAPS folder contains the outputs of longitudinal segmentations performed with FreeSurfer for a fictional participant `CLNC01` at sessions `M000` and `M018`.
First, the [`t1-freesurfer` pipeline](../../Pipelines/T1_FreeSurfer) is run on the two sessions.
Then, the [`t1-freesurfer-longitudinal` pipeline](../../Pipelines/T1_FreeSurfer_Longitudinal) will compute the intra-subject template `sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018` using the `M000` and `M018` sessions.
This template is finally used to longitudinally correct the segmentations, whose results are stored in the `sub-CLNC01_ses-M00.long.sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018` and `sub-CLNC01_ses-M018.long.sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018` folders.

Of note, the `<time_point_id>.long.<template_id>` naming comes from FreeSurfer when running the longitudinal `recon-all` command.

```Text
subjects/
├── sub-CLNC01/
│   ├── long-M000M018/
│   │   ├── long-M000M018_sessions.tsv
│   │   └── freesurfer_unbiased_template/
│   │       └── sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018/
│   │           ├── base-tps/
│   │           ├── label/
│   │           ├── mri/
│   │           ├── stats/
│   │           └── surf/
│   ├── ses-M000/
│   │   └── t1/
│   │       ├── freesurfer_cross_sectional/
│   │       │   ├── regional_measures/
│   │       │   └── sub-CLNC01_ses-M000/
│   │       │       ├── label/
│   │       │       ├── mri/
│   │       │       ├── stats/
│   │       │       └── surf/
│   │       └── long-M000M018/
│   │           └── freesurfer_longitudinal/
│   │               ├── regional_measures/
│   │               └── sub-CLNC01_ses-M000.long.sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018/
│   │                   ├── label/
│   │                   ├── mri/
│   │                   ├── stats/
│   │                   └── surf/
│   └── ses-M018/
│       └── t1/
│           ├── freesurfer_cross_sectional/
│           │   ├── regional_measures/
│           │   └── sub-CLNC01_ses-M018/
│           │       ├── label/
│           │       ├── mri/
│           │       ├── stats/
│           │       └── surf/
│           └── long-M000M018
│               └── freesurfer_longitudinal
│                   ├── regional_measures
│                   └── sub-CLNC01_ses-M018.long.sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018/
│                       ├── label/
│                       ├── mri/
│                       ├── stats/
│                       └── surf/
└── sub-CLNC02/
    ├── ...

```

Commit message:

[ENH] Implement dataset description for CAPS datasets (#1158)
* add caps module with basic logic

* try linking to the engine

* add unit tests for caps module

* add unit tests for anat pipeline (might change to more general later...)

* fix broken unit tests

* trigger CI

* post rebase fixes

* add suggestion for basic dataset_description.json in error

* add some doc

* fix permission errors for non regression tests

* update documentation

* rework CAPS dataset_description.json

* write additional processing

* fix input dir

* fix permission errors

* use log_and_warn function

* permission issues on CI machines

* improvements

* update documentation

* provide more flexibility for comparing different versions of the specs

* remove processing_path attribute

* allow multiple processing with same name if input paths are different

* allow users to specify the name of the CAPS dataset for pipelines that create a CAPS

* update documentation

* small modification to the docs

docs/CAPS/Introduction.md, after:


# Introduction

The outputs of the Clinica pipelines are stored following a specific structure called **CAPS** (ClinicA Processed Structure), which is inspired from the [BIDS](../BIDS.md) structure and the upcoming BIDS Derivatives.
The CAPS specifications are described in detail [here](./Specifications.md).
Similar to the BIDS specifications, the CAPS specifications are versioned such that it can evolve in time.
The version of the CAPS specifications is indicated in a `dataset_description.json` file, located at the root of the CAPS folder.
This file is similar to the `dataset_description.json` file of the BIDS specifications and provides other metadata on the dataset.

## Motivation

When the development of Clinica started in 2015, the BIDS specifications did not provide specific rules for the processed data.
As a result, the goal of CAPS (designed by the [Aramis Lab](http://www.aramislab.fr/)) was to define a hierarchy for the data processed using Clinica.
The idea is to include in a single folder all the results of the different pipelines and organize the data following the main patterns of the BIDS specifications.

!!! note
    It is our objective for the CAPS and BIDS Derivatives specifications to converge.

## Definitions

We use the same definitions as the BIDS Specifications concerning **Dataset**, **Subject**, **Session**, **MRI acquisition**, **Data type**, **Task**, **Event** and **Run**.
On top on that, we define the notion of:

1. **Group** - a set of subjects (`group` key).
You will find this notion when working on any group-wise analysis (e.g. template creation from a list of subjects, statistical analysis).
This is simply a label name that will define the group of subjects used for this analysis.
It will be written in your output CAPS folder, for possible future reuses.
For example, an `AD` group label could be used in case you create a template for a group of Alzheimer’s disease patients.
Any time you would like to use this `AD` template you will need to provide the group label used to identify the pipeline output obtained from this group.
You might also use `CNvsAD`, for instance, as group label for a statistical group comparison.

2. **Longitudinal template** - a set of sessions (`long` key).
You will find this notion when working on longitudinal datasets.
This is simply a label that will define the set of sessions considered.
Unlike group, longitudinal template is dedicated to intra-subject analysis.
Besides, the longitudinal label for a participant is defined concatenating the different session labels in alphabetical order so that the longitudinal label will be unique.
For instance, if the intra-subject template is computed on `M018` and `M000` sessions, the longitudinal ID will be `long-M000M018`.

## Differences with BIDS

Several differences exist between the BIDS and CAPS specifications.

- Instead of the BIDS `derivatives/` folder, the processed data are stored in the CAPS folder.
- CAPS assumes that the session is always present in a BIDS dataset even though there is a single session. In other words, all datasets are considered longitudinal, even when they have only one session.
- NIfTI files generated by a Clinica pipeline are always compressed. Compression is recommended by the BIDS specifications but not mandatory.

## Subject and group naming

The naming convention for subjects (participants) is identical to the BIDS Specifications 1.0.0.
Groups should be assigned unique labels. Labels can consist of letters and/or numbers.

## Examples

### Subject level example

This CAPS folder contains the outputs of the [`dwi-preprocessing-*` pipeline](../Pipelines/DWI_Preprocessing.md) and [`dwi-dti` pipeline](../Pipelines/DWI_DTI.md) of a fictional participant `CLNC01` at session `M000`:

```Text
dataset_description.json
subjects/
└─ sub-CLNC01/
   └─ ses-M000/
      └─ dwi/
         ├─ dti_based_processing/
         │  ├─ atlas_statistics/
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-JHUTracts0_res-1x1x1_map-FA_statistics.tsv
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-JHUTracts0_res-1x1x1_map-MD_statistics.tsv
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-JHUTracts0_res-1x1x1_map-AD_statistics.tsv
         │  │  └─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-JHUTracts0_res-1x1x1_map-RD_statistics.tsv
         │  ├─ native_space/
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_model-DTI_diffmodel.nii.gz
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_FA.nii.gz
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_MD.nii.gz
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_AD.nii.gz
         │  │  ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_RD.nii.gz
         │  │  └─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_DECFA.nii.gz
         │  └─ normalized_space/
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_AD.nii.gz
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_affine.mat
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_deformation.nii.gz
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_FA.nii.gz
         │     ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_MD.nii.gz
         │     └─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-MNI152Lin_res-1x1x1_RD.nii.gz
         └─ preprocessing/
            ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_brainmask.nii.gz
            ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_preproc.bval
            ├─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_preproc.bvec
            └─ sub-CNLC01_ses-M000_dwi_space-b0_preproc.nii.gz
```

### Group level example

This CAPS folder contains the outputs of a group comparison of patients with Alzheimer’s disease (`AD`) and healthy subjects (`HC`) thanks to the [`statistics-surface` pipeline](../Pipelines/Stats_Surface.md).
Results are stored under the group ID `ADvsHC`:

```Text
dataset_description.json
groups/
└─ group-ADvsHC/
   └─ statistics/
      ├─ participant.tsv
      └─ surfstat_group_comparison/
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_FDR.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_FDR.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_TStatistics.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_TStatistics.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_correctedPValue.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_correctedPValue.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_uncorrectedPValue.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_HC-lt-AD_measure-ct_fwhm-20_uncorrectedPValue.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_glm.json
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_FDR.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_FDR.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_TStatistics.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_TStatistics.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_correctedPValue.jpg
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_correctedPValue.mat
         ├─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_uncorrectedPValue.jpg
         └─ group-ADvsHC_AD-lt-HC_measure-ct_fwhm-20_uncorrectedPValue.mat
```

### Subject level example with longitudinal analysis

This CAPS folder contains the outputs of longitudinal segmentations performed with [FreeSurfer](../Third-party.md#freesurfer) for a fictional participant `CLNC01` at sessions `M000` and `M018`.
First, the [`t1-freesurfer` pipeline](../Pipelines/T1_FreeSurfer.md) is run on the two sessions.
Then, the [`t1-freesurfer-longitudinal` pipeline](../Pipelines/T1_FreeSurfer_Longitudinal.md) will compute the intra-subject template `sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018` using the `M000` and `M018` sessions.
This template is finally used to longitudinally correct the segmentations, whose results are stored in the `sub-CLNC01_ses-M000.long.sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018` and `sub-CLNC01_ses-M018.long.sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018` folders.

Of note, the `<time_point_id>.long.<template_id>` naming comes from [FreeSurfer](../Third-party.md#freesurfer) when running the longitudinal `recon-all` command.

```Text
dataset_description.json
subjects/
├── sub-CLNC01/
│   ├── long-M000M018/
│   │   ├── long-M000M018_sessions.tsv
│   │   └── freesurfer_unbiased_template/
│   │       └── sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018/
│   │           ├── base-tps/
│   │           ├── label/
│   │           ├── mri/
│   │           ├── stats/
│   │           └── surf/
│   ├── ses-M000/
│   │   └── t1/
│   │       ├── freesurfer_cross_sectional/
│   │       │   ├── regional_measures/
│   │       │   └── sub-CLNC01_ses-M000/
│   │       │       ├── label/
│   │       │       ├── mri/
│   │       │       ├── stats/
│   │       │       └── surf/
│   │       └── long-M000M018/
│   │           └── freesurfer_longitudinal/
│   │               ├── regional_measures/
│   │               └── sub-CLNC01_ses-M000.long.sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018/
│   │                   ├── label/
│   │                   ├── mri/
│   │                   ├── stats/
│   │                   └── surf/
│   └── ses-M018/
│       └── t1/
│           ├── freesurfer_cross_sectional/
│           │   ├── regional_measures/
│           │   └── sub-CLNC01_ses-M018/
│           │       ├── label/
│           │       ├── mri/
│           │       ├── stats/
│           │       └── surf/
│           └── long-M000M018
│               └── freesurfer_longitudinal
│                   ├── regional_measures
│                   └── sub-CLNC01_ses-M018.long.sub-CLNC01_long-M000M018/
│                       ├── label/
│                       ├── mri/
│                       ├── stats/
│                       └── surf/
└── sub-CLNC02/
    ├── ...

```
