docs/ClinicaConferences.md, before:

# Clinica at Conferences

## Neuro OpenScience Workshop 2019

Clinica was showcased at the [Neuro OpenScience Workshop](http://open-neuro.org/) held at the [ICM](https://icm-institute.org/) on January 15-16 2019.
You can find on [this page](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1x2BY3HZQspW2liHwRJKvhZ5f0kXdXcpz) the presentation and materials for the demo.

## Educational Course on Pattern Recognition for Clinical Neuroimaging, OHBM 2018

A major application of pattern recognition in neuroimaging is the design of decision systems to support clinical decisions.
Such approaches aim to improve diagnosis and prognosis of brain diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia or autism for instance.
The aim of this course was to teach how to design and validate pattern recognition for clinical applications in brain diseases.

The slides, Jupyter notebook and example dataset can be found in this [Google drive folder](https://drive.google.com/open?id=17-DFtdDSJwIUMde0Fk6mP-UykQxRVqGG).

To go further, check this [repository](https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-ML), which contains a software framework for reproducible machine learning experiments on automatic classification of Alzheimer's disease using multimodal MRI and PET data from three publicly available datasets (ADNI, AIBL and OASIS).

Commit message:

[DOC] Add entry in documentation for NOW 2023 (#1042)
* add entry for now 2023 (missing link for slides)

* add missing link

docs/ClinicaConferences.md, after:

# Clinica at Conferences

## Neuro OpenScience Workshop 2023

Clinica was presented at the [Neuro OpenScience Workshop](https://open-neuro.org) held at the [ICM](https://icm-institute.org/) on November 22-23 2023.
You can find on [this page](https://ninonburgos.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/2023.11.22-NOW-Clinica.pdf) the slides of the presentation.

In addition, a workshop was given on code and data versioning with an emphasis on managing neuroimaging experiments.
The materials can be found [here](https://aramislab.paris.inria.fr/workshops/NOW/2023/index.html).

## Neuro OpenScience Workshop 2019

Clinica was showcased at the [Neuro OpenScience Workshop](http://open-neuro.org/) held at the [ICM](https://icm-institute.org/) on January 15-16 2019.
You can find on [this page](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1x2BY3HZQspW2liHwRJKvhZ5f0kXdXcpz) the presentation and materials for the demo.

## Educational Course on Pattern Recognition for Clinical Neuroimaging, OHBM 2018

A major application of pattern recognition in neuroimaging is the design of decision systems to support clinical decisions.
Such approaches aim to improve diagnosis and prognosis of brain diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease, schizophrenia or autism for instance.
The aim of this course was to teach how to design and validate pattern recognition for clinical applications in brain diseases.

The slides, Jupyter notebook and example dataset can be found in this [Google drive folder](https://drive.google.com/open?id=17-DFtdDSJwIUMde0Fk6mP-UykQxRVqGG).

To go further, check this [repository](https://github.com/aramis-lab/AD-ML), which contains a software framework for reproducible machine learning experiments on automatic classification of Alzheimer's disease using multimodal MRI and PET data from three publicly available datasets (ADNI, AIBL and OASIS).
