docs/glossary.md, before:

# Glossary

This page contains definitions for acronyms and terms used in the documentation of Clinica.

#### BIDS

**BIDS** stands for *Brain Imaging Data Structure*.

It is a simple and intuitive way to organize and describe neuro-imaging data.

##### References

- [Specifications](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)

#### CSV

**CSV** stands for *comma-separated values*.

It is a text file format that uses commas to separate values, and newlines to separate records.
A CSV file stores tabular data (numbers and text) in plain text, where each line of the file
typically represents one data record.
Each record consists of the same number of fields, and these are separated by commas in the CSV file.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values)

#### fMRI

**fMRI** stands for *Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging*.

It measures brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow.
This technique relies on the fact that cerebral blood flow and neuronal activation are coupled.
When an area of the brain is in use, blood flow to that region also increases.

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_magnetic_resonance_imaging)

#### FWHM

**FWHM** stands for *Full Width at Half Maximum*.

In a distribution, full width at half maximum (FWHM) is the difference between the two values of the independent
variable at which the dependent variable is equal to half of its maximum value. In other words, it is the width of a
spectrum curve measured between those points on the y-axis which are half the maximum amplitude. 

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full_width_at_half_maximum)


#### GLM

**GLM** stands for *Generalized Linear Model*.

It can be seen as a flexible generalization of ordinary linear regression.
The GLM generalizes linear regression by allowing the linear model to be related to the response
variable via a link function and by allowing the magnitude of the variance of each measurement
to be a function of its predicted value.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized_linear_model)

#### JSON

**JSON** stands for *JavaScript Object Notation*.

It is an open standard file format and data interchange format that uses human-readable text to store
and transmit data objects consisting of attribute–value pairs and arrays (or other serializable values).
It is a commonly used data format with diverse uses in electronic data interchange, including that of web applications with servers.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON)

#### PET

**PET** stands for *Positron Emission Tomography*.

It is a functional imaging technique that uses radioactive substances known as radiotracers to
visualize and measure changes in metabolic processes, and in other physiological activities including
blood flow, regional chemical composition, and absorption.
Different tracers are used for various imaging purposes, depending on the target process within the body.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Positron_emission_tomography)

#### PSF

**PSF** stands for *Point Spread Function*.

The PSF describes the response of a focused optical imaging system to
a point source or point object, that is considered as a spatial impulse.
In functional terms, it is the spatial domain version (i.e., the inverse
Fourier transform) of the optical transfer function of an imaging system. 

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Point_spread_function)


#### PVC

**PVC** stands for *Partial-Volume Correction*.

PVC corrects partial volume effects which blur the images and 
are due to both the limited resolution of PET and the definite size of 
the PET voxel. 

##### References

- [PET data analysis](http://www.turkupetcentre.net/petanalysis/image_pve.html)


#### SUVR

**SUVR** stands for *Standardized Uptake Value Ratio*.

The SUVR is the ratio of the image-derived radioactivity concentration
 and the whole body concentration of the injected radioactivity. When SUVR > 1,
it indicates radioactivity accumulation in that region above the hypothetical
even radioactivity distribution.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standardized_uptake_value)

#### TSV

**TSV** stands for *Tab-Separated Values*.

It is a simple, text-based file format for storing tabular data.
Records are separated by newlines, and values within a record are separated by tab characters.
The TSV format is thus a delimiter-separated values format, similar to [CSV](#csv).

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tab-separated_values)

#### Voxel

A **voxel** represents a value on a regular grid in three-dimensional space.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voxel)

Commit message:

[DOC] Add term MRI in the glossary  (#1395)
* Fix broken link documentation MRI

* Change medical to magnetic in abbreviations

docs/glossary.md, after:

# Glossary

This page contains definitions for acronyms and terms used in the documentation of Clinica.

#### BIDS

**BIDS** stands for *Brain Imaging Data Structure*.

It is a simple and intuitive way to organize and describe neuro-imaging data.

##### References

- [Specifications](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)

#### CSV

**CSV** stands for *comma-separated values*.

It is a text file format that uses commas to separate values, and newlines to separate records.
A CSV file stores tabular data (numbers and text) in plain text, where each line of the file
typically represents one data record.
Each record consists of the same number of fields, and these are separated by commas in the CSV file.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values)

#### fMRI

**fMRI** stands for *Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging*.

It measures brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow.
This technique relies on the fact that cerebral blood flow and neuronal activation are coupled.
When an area of the brain is in use, blood flow to that region also increases.

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_magnetic_resonance_imaging)

#### FWHM

**FWHM** stands for *Full Width at Half Maximum*.

In a distribution, full width at half maximum (FWHM) is the difference between the two values of the independent
variable at which the dependent variable is equal to half of its maximum value. In other words, it is the width of a
spectrum curve measured between those points on the y-axis which are half the maximum amplitude. 

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Full_width_at_half_maximum)


#### GLM

**GLM** stands for *Generalized Linear Model*.

It can be seen as a flexible generalization of ordinary linear regression.
The GLM generalizes linear regression by allowing the linear model to be related to the response
variable via a link function and by allowing the magnitude of the variance of each measurement
to be a function of its predicted value.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalized_linear_model)

#### JSON

**JSON** stands for *JavaScript Object Notation*.

It is an open standard file format and data interchange format that uses human-readable text to store
and transmit data objects consisting of attribute–value pairs and arrays (or other serializable values).
It is a commonly used data format with diverse uses in electronic data interchange, including that of web applications with servers.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON)


#### MRI 

***MRI*** stands for *Magnetic Resonance Imaging*.

It is a medical imaging technique used in radiology to form pictures of the anatomy and the physiological processes inside the body.
MRI scanners use strong magnetic fields, magnetic field gradients, and radio waves to generate images of the organs in the body.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnetic_resonance_imaging)

#### PET

**PET** stands for *Positron Emission Tomography*.

It is a functional imaging technique that uses radioactive substances known as radiotracers to
visualize and measure changes in metabolic processes, and in other physiological activities including
blood flow, regional chemical composition, and absorption.
Different tracers are used for various imaging purposes, depending on the target process within the body.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Positron_emission_tomography)

#### PSF

**PSF** stands for *Point Spread Function*.

The PSF describes the response of a focused optical imaging system to
a point source or point object, that is considered as a spatial impulse.
In functional terms, it is the spatial domain version (i.e., the inverse
Fourier transform) of the optical transfer function of an imaging system. 

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Point_spread_function)


#### PVC

**PVC** stands for *Partial-Volume Correction*.

PVC corrects partial volume effects which blur the images and 
are due to both the limited resolution of PET and the definite size of 
the PET voxel. 

##### References

- [PET data analysis](http://www.turkupetcentre.net/petanalysis/image_pve.html)


#### SUVR

**SUVR** stands for *Standardized Uptake Value Ratio*.

The SUVR is the ratio of the image-derived radioactivity concentration
 and the whole body concentration of the injected radioactivity. When SUVR > 1,
it indicates radioactivity accumulation in that region above the hypothetical
even radioactivity distribution.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standardized_uptake_value)

#### TSV

**TSV** stands for *Tab-Separated Values*.

It is a simple, text-based file format for storing tabular data.
Records are separated by newlines, and values within a record are separated by tab characters.
The TSV format is thus a delimiter-separated values format, similar to [CSV](#csv).

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tab-separated_values)

#### Voxel

A **voxel** represents a value on a regular grid in three-dimensional space.

##### References

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voxel)
