docs/Converters/IXItoBIDS.md, before:

# `ixi-to-bids` – Conversion of Information eXtraction from Images (IXI) to BIDS format
??? quote "Dataset Description"
    The [Information eXtraction from Images](https://brain-development.org/ixi-dataset/)
    is a project which issued a dataset of nearly 600 images from healthy subjects. The MR acquisition
    protocol includes T1,T2, PD weighted, MRA and diffusion-weighted images.
    Three hospitals in London were involved in data collection.

## Downloading the data
The IXI dataset can be downloaded freely from the [IXI webpage](https://brain-development.org/ixi-dataset/).
!!! danger "Organising data with the aim of using the converter"
    The folders and files downloaded from the website should be left as they are (name, inner organisation...) but can be
    placed where the user wants them.

## Using the converter
### Available Modalities

!!! info inline end ""
    DTI files are merged together to produce **one** DWI image.
The converter can convert to [BIDS](../glossary.md#bids) all the modalities offered by IXI :
DTI ; T1 ; T2 ; PD ; angiography.


### Dependencies
If you [installed clinica](../Installation.md#install-clinica), this converter needs no further dependencies.

### Understanding the command line
```bash
clinica convert ixi-to-bids DATASET_DIRECTORY BIDS_DIRECTORY CLINICAL_DATA_DIRECTORY
```
where :

- `DATASET_DIRECTORY` is the path to the raw IXI dataset directory, which should contain all the IXI folders previously downloaded :
  ```
  DATASET_DIRECTORY
  ├── IXI-T1
  │   ├── IXI002-Guys-0828-T1.nii.gz
  │   ├── ...
  ├── IXI-DTI
  │   └── IXI002-Guys-0828-DTI-00.nii.gz
  │   ├── ...
  ...
  ```

- `BIDS_DIRECTORY` is the path to the BIDS folder to be created
- `CLINICAL_DATA_DIRECTORY` is the path to the folder where the clinical data of the IXI dataset is stored.
```
CLINICAL_DATA_DIRECTORY
├── IXI.xls
...
```

--8<-- "snippets/converters_options.md"

Commit message:

[DOC] Refactor UKB-To-BIDS documentation page (#1284)
* First proposition for ukb conv

* WIP 2

* Last changes

* Changes upon suggestions

* Add copy

* Fix link

docs/Converters/IXItoBIDS.md, after:

# `ixi-to-bids` – Conversion of Information eXtraction from Images (IXI) to BIDS format
??? quote "Dataset Description"
    The [Information eXtraction from Images](https://brain-development.org/ixi-dataset/)
    is a project which issued a dataset of nearly 600 nifti images from healthy subjects.
    The MR acquisition protocol includes T1,T2, PD weighted, MRA and diffusion-weighted images.
    Three hospitals in London were involved in data collection.

## Downloading the data
The IXI dataset can be downloaded freely from the [IXI webpage](https://brain-development.org/ixi-dataset/).
!!! danger "Organising data with the aim of using the converter"
    The folders and files downloaded from the website should be left **as they are** (name, inner organisation...) but can be
    placed where the user wants them.

## Using the converter
### Available Modalities

!!! info inline end ""
    DTI files are merged together to produce **one** DWI image.
The converter can convert to [BIDS](../glossary.md#bids) all the modalities offered by IXI :
DTI ; T1 ; T2 ; PD ; angiography.


### Dependencies
If you [installed clinica](../Installation.md#install-clinica), this converter needs no further dependencies.

### Understanding the command line
```{ .bash .copy }
clinica convert ixi-to-bids DATASET_DIRECTORY BIDS_DIRECTORY CLINICAL_DATA_DIRECTORY [OPTIONS]
```
where :

- `DATASET_DIRECTORY` is the path to the raw IXI dataset directory, which should contain all the IXI folders previously downloaded :
  ```text title="DATASET_DIRECTORY Organisation"
  DATASET_DIRECTORY
  ├── IXI-T1
  │   ├── IXI002-Guys-0828-T1.nii.gz
  │   ├── ...
  ├── IXI-DTI
  │   └── IXI002-Guys-0828-DTI-00.nii.gz
  │   ├── ...
  ...
  ```

- `BIDS_DIRECTORY` is the path to the BIDS folder to be created
- `CLINICAL_DATA_DIRECTORY` is the path to the folder where the clinical data of the IXI dataset is stored.
```text title="CLINICAL_DATA_DIRECTORY Organisation"
    CLINICAL_DATA_DIRECTORY
    ├── IXI.xls
    ...
```

--8<-- "snippets/converters_options.md"
